in 2009 a man in laquilla italy
saw flickering lights dancing above the
stone street
he immediately knew what to do and moved
his family to a safer place
only seconds later a massive 8.3
magnitude earthquake hit the whole
region
his knowledge of the strange lights
saved his and his family's lives
so what are those mysterious warnings
for centuries people interpreted the
lights as something otherworldly
the scientific community didn't take
them seriously just put them down to a
false recollection
a mind trick or pure imagination
then came the invention of photography
and more and more evidence of the
earthquake lights appeared
with the introduction of surveillance
cameras and smartphones
the amount of evidence grew enormously
now the connection was
obvious lights appear an earthquake hits
so experts finally started taking it
seriously and started digging for the
truth
they found historical records of these
earthquake lights
eql's for short dating back to the 17th
century
there were also reports of a faint
rainbow before the great san francisco
earthquake and lights before the 1811
tremors
in missouri even after years of research
to this day geologists are still not
fully sure
what the sorts of the lights is but they
have recognized
five types of them bright flashes that
light up the sky
looking like storm lightning or a strong
camera flash
rays in the sky that can look like light
columns
different sized flames that come through
the ground
diffuse glows over the mountains and
slow moving balls of light that can be
misinterpreted as ball lightning
another equally little understood
atmospheric phenomenon
these are literally balls of lightning
that can float and explode
leaving a sulphuric odor behind but
unlike ball lightning
these spherical eqls seem to be harmless
but with all of these types of lights
experts can't know how
exactly they're connected to earthquakes
they don't only show up before one hits
some have been reported during and after
earthquakes
they can also appear with other
phenomena like meteorite crashes
volcanic eruptions or auroras for now
scientists can only come up with
theories to explain the
unexplainable one of the recent ones
claimed the lights
were electric lines being broken during
an earthquake
but this theory doesn't explain how the
phenomena was observed hundreds
or even thousands of years ago like the
ancient chinese tale of dragon looking
clouds
appearing in the sky as a warning of an
upcoming quake
or how an ancient roman historian
reported huge flame-like lights
bursting out just before a huge
earthquake occurred
another theory suggested it was escaping
gas
during an earthquake the underground
rocks expand and shrink under pressure
and heat
this opens and closes small spaces
between them
different gases make their way through
these new openings
radon for example can get released
during seismic activities
it can ionize the air making it
electrically charged
but radon doesn't do it enough to create
bright sparks of light
one of the most accepted theories is
that it might be from electricity
traveling up from
underground when underground igneous
rocks
ones that form from magma deep within
the earth are under stress
they release ionized or electrically
charged oxygen
it travels through the surface and up
into the atmosphere
where it creates a localized electric
field this also explains why only
certain regions have reported them
earthquake lights have been observed in
italy greece
france germany china and parts of south
america
those areas have a lot of drops or
ravines
that allows igneous rocks to gradually
move up toward the surface
those kinds of rocks generate an
electrical charge more easily than other
types
and as they get closer to the surface
that charge is released
flowing up and ionizing the air this
electrified plasma in the air
creates magnificent natural light shows
those particular rocks and the right
conditions exist in less than one
percent of earthquakes in the world
that also explains why the phenomenon is
so rare
to prove that theory scientists filled
containers with mixtures of glass
particles
powders and plastic discs and watched
them move around past each other during
stress
they were sort of mimicking the way
sands rocks and other underground
materials
move in an earthquake zone they soon
noticed an electrical voltage developed
when the containers are disturbed
they recreated it in the lab but still
don't quite understand
why it does this it's still just a
theory and a topic of debate
many don't even think eqls exist
even so geologists are working on a
forecasting system to alert people ahead
of time
of an earthquake coming and earthquake
lights were recently included
as one of the predicting factors so
what do experts recommend you do next
if you're home drop to the floor with
the first tremors and take cover
sturdy tables are the best option since
it can protect you from falling pieces
of other furniture
stay there until the shaking stops if
there's no table around
drop to the floor and cover your face
and head with your arms
try to get to an inside corner of the
building you're in
stay away from glass windows outside
walls
or any furniture that can fall on you
don't stand in a doorway during the
earthquake
this is a long-held myth and is only
true when it comes to a metal
load-bearing doorway if you're in bed
when the quake strikes
stay in bed don't run away cover your
head with a pillow
check the area around your bed for any
hazards heavy light fixtures
paintings mirrors or shelves above the
bed or the walls near it
are a no-go after the shaking has
stopped
and you feel safe you can leave the
building just don't use the elevator
take the stairs and follow the
authority's guidelines
now if you're outside during an
earthquake stay where you are
but move away from lights poles
buildings wires and trees
stay there until the shaking stops if
you're in a car
find a safe open spot to park far from
buildings trees or bridges
tune into the local radio and check if
any roads were damaged
in the worst case scenario you might get
trapped in your house
under debris the best thing you can do
is to stay still
don't move around because it can stir up
the dust and prevent you from breathing
cover your mouth with a handkerchief or
a piece of your clothes
rescuers will come shortly they probably
already know what happened
if you hear them don't shout try to tap
on a metal pipe or a wall
this way they'll be able to find you
faster and you won't waste
precious oxygen remember not all lights
in the sky are earthquake lights
but correctly identifying them and being
aware of and ready for an upcoming
earthquake
can save your life